Alright. Can I have everyone's attention? We're gonna
get started of our last lecture of the
day. Congratulations, you guys, for making it almost
to the end. I know that sitting in
twenty six one hundred from eleven to three
is kind of a marathon. So thank you
guys. Y'all are amazing. So the way this
lecture is going to work is it's on
basic JavaScript. We're assuming that most of you
guys are coming from background where you have
some programming experience in a language like Python,
because that's what most of the MIT classes
teach. And most of you guys are probably
not gonna have experience with JavaScript specifically. So
this lecture is designed with people from that
background where we're just gonna quickly, like, blaze
through a bunch of JavaScript syntax, and then
you can just sort of look at the
slide, map it into mentally how it lines
up with what programming you already know, like,
oh, this syntax is a little bit different
this way. And then you should be good
to go. But if you have no programming
experience at all, this might be a little
bit fast for you, in which case, we
recommend a resource which is gonna be linked
on our website that will go through the
basics of coding in JavaScript more step by
step. So if all of this flies over
your head, don't worry. Just go to that
resource after class and then you'll be able
to get caught up. So earlier we talked
about HTML and CSS. HTML being sort of
the bones of what your website actually has
in it, and then CSS being the presentation
of it, making it pretty, etcetera. Now how
JavaScript fits into this picture is if HTML
is the bones and CSS is like the
clothing and stuff, then JavaScript is like the
organs and muscles that make everything work. So
JavaScript is a programming language that takes the
content of a web page and manipulates it,
so it's what allows the website to change
as you're interacting with it. And it's used
by basically every website in existence and it
is not related to Java. Please just note.
So where we run JavaScript code is there
are a few places we can run it.
Later today, before class tomorrow, you guys are
going to need to install Node JS, which
a program that allows you to run JavaScript
on your own machine. But every all of
our web browsers know how to run JavaScript.
So if we want to run JavaScript and
if you wanna play around with it, I'd
recommend opening up the console. So you can
do that by going to inspect element here,
opening up here, and then the console's gonna
be one of these tabs here. And then
in the console, I can type in any
sort of JavaScript I want. I can print
something. That's a typo, but whatever. And I
can do math. Two to the power of
three is eight, etcetera. I can run any
JavaScript that I want in the console here.
And so for the time being, we'll be
using the console to just play around with
it. Feel free to open up your computers,
open up the console, and just play around
with things as I'm going through the syntax.
So now back to actual JavaScript. JavaScript has
five primitive data types. So if you notice
in some languages, such as Java, they make
a distinction between int and float, like integer
types and ones with decimal points. JavaScript does
not. So everything is just a number, or
a boolean, true or false, string, or JavaScript
has these two funky types called null and
undefined. We will get into what those are
later. They're a little bit tricky. For operators,
things pretty much work exactly as you would
expect. You can add, subtract, multiply, raise something
to a power, divide, and concatenate strings. But
the thing that doesn't work exactly as you
would expect from most other programming languages is
comparing things. So if you wanna compare whether
two things are equal, typically in JavaScript, we
use the triple equal sign, or if it's
not equal, the exclamation point and two equal
signs. So in most programming languages, we would
use double equal sign to compare whether two
values are equal. And JavaScript does have the
double equal sign operator, but so question. Two
double equal sign two, is that true or
false? Open hand, true. Closed hand, false. Yeah.
It's not a trick question. It's true. What
is this? True or false? Okay. I'm getting
a big mix, like, maybe half and half
for true and for false. So in most
programming languages, we kinda want this to be
false. Because if we have two things of
different data types, those are different entities in
memory. We can do different things with them.
But in JavaScript, it doesn't do this. In
JavaScript, two double equal sign two as a
string is true because JavaScript performs type coercion,
so it just converts one of the types
to be the same as the other type
before it compares them. Which is generally what
we don't want in programming because we don't
It causes a lot of unpredictable behavior. And
so in JavaScript, basically, the bottom line is
we always use triple equal sign when comparing
things. Alright. Let's go over some pretty basic
syntax. JavaScript has a semicolon at the end
of every single statement. So any command that
you do ends in a semicolon. It doesn't
matter whether you indent things properly or not.
So if this was a complete garbage mess
with no indenting whatsoever and white space all
over the place, JavaScript would be able to
execute it just fine. But please indent things
properly for readability. You use curly braces to
denote where blocks begin and end. So in
Python, you would have a function the function
signature, and then a colon, and then an
indentured block. In JavaScript, it's different. You use
an open and close curly brace to indicate
that block. And similarly for loops. And then
you can make comments using the double slash.
So in JavaScript, defining variables is kind of
different from how you would have done it
in most other languages. The standard way of
defining variables is by using the keyword let.
So you use let, your variable name, and
then you can set it equal to something.
Convention for naming variables is camel case. So
if you're like me, you will start coding
in JavaScript and then use the snake case
with the underscores and everything, and then you
will be sad because your code base is
not up to JavaScript convention. So use camel
case. So normally, we use let, but if
we have a variable that we want to
where we don't want to be able to
reassign later, we use const. If we say
const answer to life equals six one four
eight, that's the old course number for WebLab,
and then we try and reassign this variable
to something else, JavaScript will give us an
error. You might ask why we bother using
const at all because let just does the
same thing. But it's generally safe code practice
to define something as const if you know
that you're not gonna wanna change it. So
that if things change later, JavaScript gives you
an error, know something's wrong. And then there's
also another keyword that you can use to
define variables in JavaScript, it's called var. In
old, if you Google around, you might see
code that uses this. Basically, just don't use
it. We don't use that anymore. Technically speaking,
var is function scoped, so a variable defined
with var exists within the function that it
was defined in. But that is very different
from any other, the way any other programming
language works, where your variables are typically block
scoped, defined within whatever curly braces they're defined
in, or that exist within whatever curly braces
they're defined in. And so just don't use
var. It's kind of sad. Any questions on
what we've gone over so far? Alright. So
null and undefined are two things that you
might not have seen before. Undefined means that
you have not assigned something a value yet.
So you can declare a variable, let first
name and then a semi colon, without assigning
it any value, and then JavaScript will automatically
assign the value of that variable to be
undefined. And alternatively, we can also use null
to explicitly say, there is no value for
this variable and, yeah, if just if in
the purposes of your code, you want to
know whether this variable has, like, no value.
Pretty simple, console dot log prints something. And
it's good for debugging, so you can put
console logs all over your code, and then
it'll print out things that are useful for
you to know. Okay. JavaScript also supports template
strings. So if you want to normally, you
would define a string using the quotation marks,
regular quotation marks. But if we define a
string with the back tick, which is in
the top left corner of our keyboard, then
we can put in little bits like this
that have the dollar sign and then curly
braces, and then inside those curly braces, we
can put any JavaScript expression we want. So
basically, this will evaluate this JavaScript expression, multiply
these two variables together, and then stick that
right into the string. So these are called
template strings. Another way of debugging, if you
want, you can use an alert which will
generate a pop up on your web screen.
Okay. Any questions on what we covered so
far? Sorry. We are just, like, blazing through
this one thing at a time. Alright. So
for arrays, this is pretty similar to lists
in Python or whatever, but we can fill
our array with literally anything we want. Remember
that in all programming languages, arrays are zero
indexed, which means that the first index, if
we want to get out the element at
index three of pets, which is what this
is doing, then this is index zero, this
is index one, index two, index three, so
this one is bird. This is not index
one. And then we can replace an element
of our array with whatever we want. So
if we want the second, the element at
index two of pets to be hamster, then
we go index zero, one, two, replace that
with hamster. Any questions on this? K. And
then another thing we can do with arrays
in JavaScript that's kind of unique to JavaScript
is push and pop. Push allows you to
just add something directly to the end of
the array, and pop takes something off of
the end of the array. So here, we're
popping off, we have cat, dog, guinea pig,
and bird. We're gonna pop off the last
element, which is bird, and now our array
looks like this. And then we're gonna push
rabbit onto the end, and so now our
array looks like this. Questions? Okay. Conditional work
as pretty similarly to every other language. We
have if, if, else if and else. So
if whatever value is stored in our variable
hour is less than 12, it'll print this.
But if it's not less than twelve, then
it will go on to the next statement
here and check if that is true. So
if it's not less than twelve but less
than 16, then it'll print this. And then
if it's not less than 12 or 16
but less than 20, it'll print this. And
then finally, if it's greater than 20, it'll
print this. Okay. And indentation is good but
not necessary for your code to work. While
loops, also pretty familiar. You can define some
kind of variable and then perform an action
as long as this variable is satisfied. So
if we set z to be one, then
it'll go here, check if this condition is
true. If it is, which it is because
z is one, then it'll go execute what's
inside of here, and then come back up
here, check if the condition is still true,
if it is, we execute it again, and
so on and so on and so on
until this condition becomes false. So this block
of code will print everything up until and
including ten twenty four because we console dot
log it first and then we go back
up and check if it's less than a
thousand. And if we want to iterate through
an array, we have to do this funky
thing, which you will have seen if you're
familiar with Java or c or one of
these other languages. We define an array, define
a index that or a variable that contains
the index of our array that we're currently
looking at. So we'll set it equal to
zero, and then we iterate through every index
of the array until we hit the length.
So if the length here is four, so
this is four elements in the array, then
we're going to, I is going to start
at zero, and then it's going to keep
incrementing until I is one, two, and three.
And then once it's equal to the length,
because remember, the length is four, then it
will stop. So we'll iterate through indices zero,
one, two, three, and iterate through the entire
array. Any questions on this? Okay. And then
if you've seen array iterating through arrays in
Python, this might look a little more familiar
to you. This just iterates not through the
indices of the array, but through the elements
themselves. So we define a variable const animal
and then we say of pets. And then
that will and then animal sorry, JavaScript will
just keep going through and reassigning or redeclaring
animal to be the next element of the
array. So animal will be, at first, the
string cat, and then the string dog, and
then guinea pig and bird, etcetera. Questions on
this? Okay. And now we're going on to
some more complicated stuff. In JavaScript, there are
some things that we don't have primitive data
types for, more complicated entities that we wanna
represent in code. And so we can use
something called JavaScript objects. This is kind of
different than objects in most other languages, most
other object oriented languages. A JavaScript object is
more similar to a Python dictionary because it's
just a set of keys and values. And
you can access the properties of an object
using the syntax that's very similar to a
dictionary in most other languages, where you use
the square brackets and then the string for
whatever the property name is. Or you can
use a syntax that's more similar to objects
in other programming languages, such as Python, by
using the name of the object, which in
this case, we're defining as a car, and
then the dot, and then the name of
the property. Questions on any of this? Alright.
And then something kind of special that you
can do in JavaScript is object destructuring. If
you want to get multiple properties at once,
then you can either use multiple lines like
this and just set two variables, make and
model, to be whatever we pulled out of
this my car object, or we can also
put these fancy little curly braces here and
stick make and model in here, and then
this code is exactly equivalent to this code.
So it's just a shorthand way of assigning
variables to the values in a JavaScript object.
And we'll probably be using this a bit
in our web programming. Okay. So earlier, talked
about equality, where we can check if two
parameter values are equal using the triple equal
sign. However, what does this mean for arrays
and objects? So if we have two arrays
and we initialize them with the exact same
values, but then we do triple equal sign
on these two arrays, we get that this
is false. Turn and talk to someone next
to you why you think this is the
case. Yeah? Yes. Alright. I'm going to pull
it back. So the reason why these are
false, as I'm guessing a lot of you
know, is that object variables are references. So
they point to the location of memory where
this is stored. So what we're doing when
we say, let person one equal this, is
we're creating a new object. Okay. Oh, wait
wait, sorry. I was gonna do this on
the board. So when we create a new
person one object, we are creating a new
variable in memory, some new object that has
name Bill Gates. Sorry, my handwriting is terrible.
And then we say person one is pointing
to that. And then on line two, when
we create a new person, we create person
two. We're creating another object in memory that
also has name Bill Gates, but and we
have person two pointing to that. And when
we check if person one is equal to
person two with the triple equal sign, then
we're checking actually whether the location of memory
that person one is pointing to is the
same location of memory as what person two
is pointing to. And they're not, because they're
different places in memory, even though they have
the same value. But if we were to
do something like the code we have here
on the bottom, where we say we create
a new object with the name Bill Gates,
but then we define person two by setting
it equal to person one, then they're pointing
to the same location of memory and this
will evaluate to true. And because of that,
that also means that copying arrays and objects
is not so easy. Because if we had
array pointing to an array, one, two, three,
and then we set copy array to the
array, similar to what we had over there,
we have two variables pointing to the same
location in memory. And so if we do
something like copy array at index one is
equal to 10 gazillion, then it would update
and edit not only copy array, but also
array, because they're pointing to the same array
in memory. So this will not work. This
will make you sad with lots of bugs.
But you can copy arrays and objects using
the spread operator, which, I mean, what it
does is it literally just takes all of
the elements of this array and unpacks them
and then we can create a new array
or a new object with them. Any questions
on any of this that we've gone over
so far? Alrighty then. We are moving right
along. Last main topic for today, functions. Functions
take in an input and do something with
it. And sometimes we want it to return
an output value, sometimes we don't. The JavaScript
function syntax is quite different from what you
have seen in other languages. So in JavaScript,
there are multiple ways to define a function.
So if you go poking around online, you
might see different ways of defining a function.
But the way that we're gonna use for
WebLab takes in parameters in parentheses, and then
it has a little arrow, and then it
has the body of the function in curly
braces. And this is kind of nice because
it sort of mirrors this diagram that I
have above, where we have our function that
takes in an input and feeds it into
the body of a function to do something
with that input. Okay. So here's an example
of a function definition. It takes in a
temperature in Celsius and then feeds that into
the body of the function where we're computing
the equivalent temperature in Fahrenheit and then returning
it. Any questions on this code? Cool. I'll
give you a minute to, like, digest it.
Alright. And so if I have this function
definition, exactly the same as what I just
showed you, the only problem with this is
that we can't quite call this function. So
just think for a sec. What do we
need to add so that we can actually
make this refer to this function and call
it? Well, for that, we need to add
a name. We need to have some kind
of way of referring to this function. And
so let's call, let's say we wanna name
our function Celsius to Fahrenheit. And so we
have this function stored stored in memory somewhere
on our computer, in this big gray box.
And then we wanna have a name or
a variable that can point to that location
in memory. And so in order to do
that, we define a variable and set it
equal to the function itself. So const just
means that this cannot be reassigned where in
memory this points to, which we don't want
it to be. And then this is the
name of our variable. We're setting our variable
equal to this entire function. And then, of
course, there's a semi colon. And so the
bottom line of this is that a function
is this big gray thing, a value stored
in memory just the same as a string,
an int, array, etcetera. So that means that
we can assign a variable to point to
it, and that's how we give our function
a name. And then if we want to
call our function, we use parentheses, just like
any other programming language, and put in whatever
input we want. And then this, Celsius to
Fahrenheit of 26, will be 78.8, and then
that value will be assigned to the variable
room temp. Alright. And then as a quick
preview to the lecture that we're going to
talk about, where we're gonna talk more about
this tomorrow. But as a preview, we can
pass around a function just like any other
value. So that means that we can give
a function as an argument to another function
and we call that a callback. So one,
as a quick practice actually, no, I'm gonna
skip this for the sake of time. But
we have an example of set timeout, which
is a JavaScript library function that calls a
function after a certain delay. So this function
takes in two parameters, the function to call
and the delay. So if I call the
set timeout function, I'm gonna say, okay, do
this, whatever function I'm passing in, after this
many milliseconds. So how can we print our
message, call this print something function that I
defined at the top of the slide, after
five seconds? So give me actually, you know
what? Take a minute, look, think about whether
these which ones of these are valid, talk
to someone next to you about which ones
of these will work. And raise your hand
if you have any questions. I detect general
confusion. So could someone raise their hand and
ask me to re explain something about what
they're confused about? Alright. In that case, I
guess I will just keep flowing forward then.
So if you think a will work to
give me open hand. If you think it
won't work, give me close hand. Okay. I'm
getting a mix. Alright. A does work. So
print something is a variable that holds that
holds the value that is this function. And
so we're giving this function into the set
timeout and saying, call this function after five
seconds. Give me open hands if you think
b works, closed hands if you think it
doesn't. Also a mix. So b does not
work. B will call print something, so when
you put these parentheses next to your function,
that calls it right away. So we're gonna
call the function right away and then take
whatever this function returned and pass that into
set timeout, which is not what we want.
Because this function returns nothing. Null, null, or
undefined or something like that. And raise your
open hand if you think c works, close
hand if you think it doesn't. Okay. Alright.
Most of y'all are getting it. C does
work because this function here, defined in c,
is exactly the same as the function that
we set the variable to print something. So
it does the exact same thing. Yes. Exactly.
It will be a different object, a different
function, or like define in a different place
in memory, but it'll be a function that
does the same thing. Yes. So don't do
b. Don't call your function and you need
to pass in the function itself. Alright. Seems
like y'all got c, so I'm not going
to spend time and explain it. But these
are two functions that you might find useful
in your projects at some point. Set interval
calls a function after a delay. Set time
out calls a function, like, every at certain
intervals. So if we want to call a
function every, like, ten milliseconds or something, we
would use set time out and pass in
our function as a callback. Alright. Slide is
just here so you guys know that classes
in JavaScript exist. They're a thing. We're not
gonna be using them in WebLab so you
don't need to know how they work for
the purposes of WebLab. But they exist. Okay.
And if a lot of this lecture went
flying over your head, don't worry, that's very
normal. We have I found this website online
that I thought was pretty good. It introduces
JavaScript concepts in a pretty beginner friendly way
and you can go through some exercises to
practice so you can see that afterward. Okay.
Time for feedback. If you can pull out
your phones or whatever or devices and fill
out this form, it only takes one minute,
that would be much appreciated. I'll give you
one minute to do that and then we'll
move on to announcements, and y'all will be
free. Just, like, look at me and give
me a thumbs up when you're done with
the feedback form so I know. Alright. If
you're not done with the feedback form, feel
free to continue. But for the sake of
time, I'm going to segue into final announcements.
So important announcement is that if you have
not done the second part of homework zero
of our setup to install Node JS on
your system, you're gonna need that for class
tomorrow. So make sure to do that. It's
super quick. If you run into issues with
setup or you had run into any issues
today that you weren't able to get resolved
during lecture, feel free to come to office
hours, seven to 9PM tonight in the basement
of the Status Center right over there. Or
if you're new to programming and you just
wanna, like you just wanna talk about it
with someone and we can we can teach
you stuff in office hours. We we have
a lot of staff. Another thing is team
finding. So if you need a team, please
join the Zoom, weblive.is/zoom, or if you're on
the Zoom already, then that's great. We will
have a little team finding mini mixer in,
like, a couple minutes. And then team finalizing
your team and submitting brainstorming and submitting 10
ideas for your website is due by the
end of day the end of the day
on Wednesday. So just have that on your
radar. And for recordings for today, you will
have that posted as soon as we edit
and finalize things. But you should be able
to I think you should be able to
see the livestream still on YouTube, like, right
after this is over. And then it should
also be available on Panopto, on weblab.is/panopto. We'll
send out that link as well. Yeah. Okay.
So if you needed to find a team,
feel free to stay here and just hop
on weblab.is/zoom. Do you have any other announcements?
Yeah. Thanks, Abi. A few more announcements. We
have a few extra shirts from last year.
It's free, free merch. You can go up
to the top where Stanley and Daniel are
to pick up free shirts. And there's also
extra pizza. So if you want extra pizza,
take it, please. We're otherwise left with a
lot of pizza we don't know what to
do with.